---
title: "State of Grace"
date: 2018-11-26T12:29:40+06:00
type: post
image: images/blog/state-of-grace.png
---
<p  style='text-align:justify'><span style='font-size:14.0pt;
line-height:107%;font-family:"Bodoni Bd BT",serif;'><i>“...work out your own salvation with fear and trembling, for it is God who works in you, both to will and to work for His good pleasure”</i>
                        (Philippians 2:12-13)</span></p>
						
<p style="text-align:justify;">I was reading a <a href = "http://phatcatholic.blogspot.com/2014/10/what-is-grace-of-final-perseverance.html">blog<a> and I got to thinking maybe I should write my own Conversion Story too. This is not the story, but I can tell you that every step of the way has involved two main ingredients that I did not know about then and only realise now in hindsight. The first ingredient is Grace. The second is State of Grace. Up until this moment that I write, I never realised this fact.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">It&rsquo;s a jolt to my senses to put <i><a href = "https://soulatcrossroad.com/blog/grace"> Grace <a></i> and <em>State of Grace</em> side by side, because until now, I have never attempted to give a name or description to what was going on with me at that time; I wouldn&rsquo;t have been able to. At the time when both ingredients were in action, I was sure that I was committing a, or rather I should say, another mortal sin. But I look back and I see how amazing it all is. Grace and State of Grace. A cycle. You receive motivation which puts you in a position to receive more motivation because only when you acknowledge yourself to be nothing that God lifts you up.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">State of Grace is the state when you are <strong>truly aware</strong> that you are a sinner in the need of God&rsquo;s mercy and that it is<strong> only</strong> Jesus that can save you. It&rsquo;s not so much as whether you are in sin or out of it &ndash; <span style='font-size:10.0pt;
'><i>of course you must be making serious and conscious effort to be out of it </i></span>&ndash; but that you are truly aware that your whole nature is sinful &ndash; <span style='font-size:10.0pt;
'><i>regardless of whether you have gone for Confession or not</i></span> &ndash; you are truly repentant &ndash; <span style='font-size:10.0pt;
'><i>repentant meaning you don&rsquo;t want to do it again even if you don&rsquo;t know how to stop</i></span> &ndash; and you are aware that the source of life and grace is what you are receiving to strengthen you &ndash;<span style='font-size:10.0pt;
'><i> not in the way you are expecting so you have to keep an open mind and just focus on your desire to change</i></span>.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">From the time I started receiving the Holy Eucharist, I have only understood State of Grace to be something that prevents people from receiving. When I finally became aware of the dire warning attached to receiving when not in a state of grace &ndash; eternal condemnation, sure place in hell &ndash; I was always in a state of mild panic anytime I had to receive. It is one thing to receive the Holy Eucharist when you are unsure of what state you are in, but when you are sure you are in a state of mortal sin, I don&rsquo;t think you should attempt it. Unless&hellip; unless that is the only way you hope to get out of it.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">I&rsquo;ve always felt the repentant thief was lucky the way he got express passage into heaven just by confessing that Jesus is the long-awaited King at that key moment; just in the nick of time. He was a really very lucky man. What are our chances of being that lucky? But now, I think that as much as he is in heaven now, his warning to me or anybody else reading his story will be, <em>&ldquo;Don&rsquo;t try this at home! Don&rsquo;t wait until you are a convicted criminal facing death before you seek and find God.&rdquo;</em> On the other hand, I also think he will tell us that if breaking the law is the only chance we have at gaining life everlasting, then we must take it. We must not let our sinful state keep us away from receiving God. It must be that sorry state that brings us closer to God.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">I learned this first-hand when I found myself in a situation where it was die or die. There was a period in my life I stopped receiving the Holy Eucharist; many years and for reasons I fail to remember. During the period of abstaining, I fell&hellip; &ndash; drifted is a better word &ndash; I drifted into mortal sin. I had been dying slowly until I was dead. Numb with no feelings. No consciousness. I couldn&rsquo;t hold on to reality long enough to make sense of it. And so, in this dead state, I didn&rsquo;t see the side blow that was coming at me while I was proud of myself that I had dodged a direct face punch; I drifted and I was 100 percent certain I shouldn&rsquo;t receive.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">After a period of rapid and definite transitions in my life, while the dust was settling, something began to nag me; I felt a need to receive the Holy Eucharist. This only meant that my old problems were back; dealing with the issue state of grace. Also, the need to receive did not correspond with a need to go for confession; I was still in terminal state (mortal sin) while being dead and numb. Not that I didn&rsquo;t think I needed to go for confession. Not that I didn&rsquo;t know I will have to go for confession. I just couldn&rsquo;t go at that time; I couldn&rsquo;t do it in the right order. The good thing about committing mortal sins is that you are certain you have committed a sin; I hate the indecision about venial sins. My excuse for not going to confession for more than 3 years had been that I didn&rsquo;t <em>feel</em> like I had committed any sin. But now I that I was sure, what excuse did I have?
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">Still, I was too ashamed to go. I couldn&rsquo;t get my feet to move to the Confessional. But while it was hard to leave my house to come for Confession, it was easier to come for Mass. Maybe it was because of the only prayer I remember making to at the time: <em>&ldquo;&hellip;just keep me coming to Church, if nothing else.&rdquo;</em> No matter how bad life is, I just want my body, at least, to be present in a Eucharistic Celebration every Sunday. So, I took a risk. I gambled with my soul. I decided to go for Holy Communion.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">The good thing about being dead is that you start being good at Logic and Philosophy. &nbsp;&ldquo;<em>What is another mortal sin when you are drowning in one already? Isn't dead dead?</em>&rdquo; The good thing about coming to a decision to seek a life-source while being dead is that you realise you are not as dead as you think. When I made the decision to receive without immediate confession, I think that was when I came back to life because I was now acutely aware I could die doing something so wrong.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">I knew there was no way I was going to confession, but it had gotten to a point where I couldn&rsquo;t be at Mass and not receive. Not because I looked bad or odd, but it just didn&rsquo;t make sense; being present and not participating doesn&rsquo;t make sense. And then it starts to take its toll on you, and then you no longer want to be present. Before you know it, you start skipping Church. Worse things happen to you when you think you are at rock bottom and nothing can get worse; there is always lower than low and then lower than that. Unless you are in hell fire, it&rsquo;s not rock bottom; nothing lower than that.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">I was sure that <em>being present </em>at Mass every Sunday was non-negotiable for me and so I told God, &ldquo;<em>let this Communion I receive be the inspiration for me to go for Confession. I want to go, but I can&rsquo;t, and I want to receive. So, I am going to receive, but you have to let this Communion bring life to me not death</em>&rdquo;. It was difficult, and it took several deep breaths and many Sundays to resolve that this would be <em>the Sunday</em> I will go.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">It took a while, and&hellip; I decided to try the Confessional. And I did. And it was so easy. Why did I make it a big deal and a big obstacle? And I kept going back for more than 3 years to get rid of that one sin. As much as I would have loved some drama like lightning flashes or some sign to say whether He is angry with me or He has heard my prayer, I felt a sense of gratitude that God did not immediately strike me down and actually waited for me to gain the courage to face the Confessional.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">But imagine if I decided to wait to get rid of the sin before approaching the Holy Eucharist, I&rsquo;d still be waiting till now and probably till eternity. And it looks like, just like the repentant thief, I had to be facing death before confessing Christ. Maybe, &ldquo;<em>the cause of our downfall&rdquo; </em>does really &ldquo;<em>become the means of our salvation</em>,&rdquo; (from the preface of the Eucharistic Prayer for Sundays III). Seems like receiving in the state of mortal sin was the only thing that made my disposition the way it should have been and must strive to be for every moment of my life. I would never have acknowledged my sorry and guilty state, and anytime I go for confession, I feel like a good person. I&rsquo;m not. I say it again, Weak and fallen nature is a life-long burden.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;">However, it looks like for the first time in my life, I was actually receiving in a State of Grace; I had unwittingly acknowledged the Eucharist to be God and the source of life to revive my sorry state, and I believed that He will save me. Now I truly understand why they say the Holy Eucharist is not for the perfect, it&rsquo;s for the sinners; the remedy of all ills. And why we say in the Exsultet, &ldquo;<em>O happy fault that earned so great, so glorious a Redeemer!</em>&rdquo; O happy fault of mine, which gave grace an entry point.
</p>
<p style="text-align:justify;"><em>State of Grace</em> is no longer a reason to stay away; it is the very reason to go forward in all boldness. People-Prevention  is not its job description. The question being posed is, &ldquo;are you a sinner in need of mercy and believe that this, which you receive, is God; Jesus Christ Himself, and He can save you?&rdquo; And in all gladness, I can shout, &ldquo;Yes! Yes!! Yes!!!&rdquo; and go and receive now.
</p>
